Whether it's Syria using Facebook to help identify and arrest dissidents or
China using its "Great Firewall" to limit access to international news
throughout the country, repressive regimes all over the world are using the
Internet to more efficiently implement surveillance, censorship, propaganda,
and control. They're getting really good at it, and the IT industry is helping.
We're helping by creating business applications -- categories of applications,
really -- that are being repurposed by oppressive governments for their own use:

- What is called censorship when practiced by a government is content filtering
  when practiced by an organization. Many companies want to keep their
  employees from viewing porn or updating their Facebook pages while at work.
  In the other direction, data loss prevention software keeps employees from
  sending proprietary corporate information outside the network and also serves
  as a censorship tool. Governments can use these products for their own ends.

- Propaganda is really just another name for marketing. All sorts of companies
  offer social media-based marketing services designed to fool consumers into
  believing there is "buzz" around a product or brand. The only thing different
  in a government propaganda campaign is the content of the messages.

- Surveillance is necessary for personalized marketing, the primary profit
  stream of the Internet. Companies have built massive Internet surveillance
  systems designed to track users' behavior all over the Internet and closely
  monitor their habits. These systems track not only individuals but also
  relationships between individuals, to deduce their interests so as to
  advertise to them more effectively. It's a totalitarian's dream[0].

- Control is how companies protect their business models by limiting what
  people can do with their computers. These same technologies can easily be
  co-opted by governments that want to ensure that only certain computer
  programs are run inside their countries or that their citizens never see
  particular news programs.

Technology magnifies power[1], and there's no technical difference between a
government and a corporation wielding it. This is how commercial security
equipment from companies like BlueCoat and Sophos end up being used by the
Syrian and other oppressive governments to surveil -- in order to arrest -- and
censor their citizens. This is how the same face-recognition technology that
Disney uses in its theme parks ends up identifying protesters in China and
Occupy Wall Street protesters in New York.

There are no easy technical solutions, especially because these four
applications -- censorship, propaganda, surveillance, and control -- are
intertwined; it can be hard to affect one without also affecting the others.
Anonymity helps prevent surveillance, but it also makes propaganda easier.
Systems that block propaganda can facilitate censorship. And giving users the
ability to run untrusted software on their computers makes it easier for
governments -- and criminals -- to install spyware.

We need more research into how to circumvent these technologies, but it's a
hard sell to both the corporations and governments that rely on them. For
example, law enforcement in the US wants drones that can identify and track
people, even as we decry China's use of the same technology. Indeed, the
battleground is often economic and political rather than technical; sometimes
circumvention research is itself illegal.

The social issues are large. Power is using the Internet to increase its power,
and we haven't yet figured out how to correct the imbalances among government,
corporate, and individual interests in our digital world. Cyberspace is still
waiting for its Gandhi, its Martin Luther King, and a convincing path from the
present to a better future.

/This essay previously appeared[2] in /IEEE Computers & Society.

[0] http://www.schneier.com/essay-418.html
[1] http://www.schneier.com/essay-409.html
[2] https://www.schneier.com/essay-420.html
